Simplify OLM APIs (#28)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/olm/simplify-apis.md

- deploy an operator using a bundle image
- deploy and upgrade an operator by referencing a bundle index

#### As an Operator User, I want to

- view the operators I can use on a cluster

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

#### The `Operator` Resource

The `operators.coreos.com/v2alpha1` API group version will be added to OLM

- alpha versions make no [support guarantees](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api_changes.md#alpha-beta-and-stable-versions), so resources can be iterated quickly

as well as a command option on `olm-operator` that enables `v2alpha1`

- leave disabled by default

```bash
olm-operator --enable-v2alpha1
```

The cluster-scoped resource, `Operator` will be added to `v2alpha1`

- cluster scoped resources can be listed without granting namespace list, but do require a `ClusterRole`
- namespace scoped resources can specify references to cluster scoped resources in their owner references, which lets us use garbage collection to clean up resources across mutliple namespaces; e.g. `RoleBindings` copied for an `OperatorGroup`

#### Constraining Installation

> In a fashion similar `OperatorGroups`, we can constrain the installation of an operator by associating it with a `ServiceAccount`. For an `Operator` resource, the user's desired `ServiceAccount` will be specified by the `spec.install.as` field. The install namespace, where the namespaced contents of an operator will be installed to, is specified by the `install.namespace` field.

Reviewer: What is driving this use case? Most admins are used to the idea of running a package manager as "root" as long as they can:

1. have an opportunity to see what it's going to do (in this case, just list the resources that will be created)
2. are able to limit the sources from which content is installed to sources they trust

The far more interesting concern is what permissions the operator itself runs with over the long term. That is a better fit for your android update analogy below. It's also observable from the operator bundle, so it's mostly a solved problem (unless you want to influence auto-upgrade gating based on RBAC changes).

When installing an operator, won't that in most cases involve creating a ServiceAccount, ClusterRole, and ClusterRoleBinding for that operator? If the installing user has the ability to create those things, don't they already have the keys to the kingdom? What value will we get from tracking resource-by-resource what that user can do vs what it takes to install the operator? Would it be sufficient to just assume that installing operators takes a lot of privilege, and gate that with RBAC for the `Operator` resource?

Reviewer 2: The user or SA creating a ClusterRoleBinding cannot do so unless they already have the permissions being granted.  For managed services (OSD, ARO) a customer does not run as a cluster-admin.  In this case we cannot allow customers to install any arbitrary operator as they could elevate privileges.

Reviewer: What does ARO stand for?

Author: > What is driving this use case? Most admins are used to the idea of running a package manager as "root"...

As @jewzaam points out, the admin installing an operator is not always a full blown cluster-admin. 

> The far more interesting concern is what permissions the operator itself runs with over the long term... It's also observable from the operator bundle, so it's mostly a solved problem (unless you want to influence auto-upgrade gating based on RBAC changes).

We plan on doing this. The recent proposal updates (hopefully) make this more clear.

> If the installing user has the ability to create those things, don't they already have the keys to the kingdom?

(kube's RBAC model)[https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/rbac/#privilege-escalation-prevention-and-bootstrapping] prevents escalation by _just_ having permission to create/update (Cluster)Roles/RoleBindings.

> What value will we get from tracking resource-by-resource what that user can do vs what it takes to install the operator?

We prevent users from escalating their privilege via OLM.

Reviewer 2: > What does ARO stand for?

[Azure Red Hat OpenShift](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/openshift/)

```yaml
spec:
  install:
    namespace: my-namespace
    serviceAccountRef:
      name: mr-plumbus
      namespace: sa-namespace
```

OLM will authenticate as this `ServiceAccount` for any requests it makes when installing or otherwise managing the operator. The exception to this rule is when OLM is viewing or mutating resources that affect the Kubernetes API; e.g. `CustomResourceDefinitions` and `APIServices`.

A Cluster Admin can generate `ServiceAccounts` with different installation privileges as needed; e.g. namespace list, pod create, etc. To allow a user to reference a `ServiceAccount`, a Cluster Admin can bind a `Role/ClusterRole` with the `use` custom verb to the user.

> This behavior will be enforced by a `ValidatingAdmissionWebhook`. In order to configure serving certs for the webhook

Author: > By "This behavior" do you mean the user's access to the ServiceAccount?

Yes.

> For OSD, my concern is a user could reference a SA with higher privilege than dedicated-admins have by simply knowing what strings to plug into the Operator CR.
Is there any RBAC check on the SA ref?

This is what the `use` custom verb and `ValidatingAdmissionWebhook` will ensure. `Operator` create/update requests will be rejected if the user does not have `use` on the referenced `ServiceAccount`.

> Ther big difference vs OperatorGroups is the user supplying the SA for the Operator CR. With OperatorGroups admins could setup what SA is used and not allow users to manage OperatorGroups at all.

Fair point. We've been working on an amendment to this proposal that shifts away from requiring a `ServiceAccount`. So, let me take the opportunity to get some early feedback.

Essentially, we want an "android-esque" permission approval flow. For us, this means that if the user that creates an `Operator` has the required permissions, OLM will install it with only the subset of permissions required. If an update comes through that requires greater permissions than the original subset, a user of greater or equal privileges must approve a permission expansion before OLM will install the update (and so on). The resource that will gate permission expansion will be `InstallPlan`.

> This behavior will be enforced by a `ValidatingAdmissionWebhook`. In order to configure serving certs for the webhook

Reviewer 2: > > For OSD, my concern is a user could reference a SA with higher privilege than dedicated-admins have by simply knowing what strings to plug into the Operator CR.
> > Is there any RBAC check on the SA ref?
> 
> This is what the `use` custom verb and `ValidatingAdmissionWebhook` will ensure. `Operator` create/update requests will be rejected if the user does not have `use` on the referenced `ServiceAccount`.

Do you have some docs on the `use` verb?  I'd like to understand it in the context of this enhancment and for use in OSD where we're starting to develop some ValidatingAdmissionWebhooks.  I see a discrete list of operations allowed but it doesn't include "USE":  https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/extensible-admission-controllers/#webhook-configuration

> 
> > Ther big difference vs OperatorGroups is the user supplying the SA for the Operator CR. With OperatorGroups admins could setup what SA is used and not allow users to manage OperatorGroups at all.
> 
> Fair point. We've been working on an amendment to this proposal that shifts away from requiring a `ServiceAccount`. So, let me take the opportunity to get some early feedback.
> 
> Essentially, we want an "android-esque" permission approval flow. For us, this means that if the user that creates an `Operator` has the required permissions, OLM will install it with only the subset of permissions required. If an update comes through that requires greater permissions than the original subset, a user of greater or equal privileges must approve a permission expansion before OLM will install the update (and so on). The resource that will gate permission expansion will be `InstallPlan`.

Seems reasonable assuming the following:
- Auto-approval will not auto-approve an `InstallPlan` if additional permissions required are outside of permissions available to the user that created the `Operator` at the time of the creation of that `Operator`.
- Approving an `InstallPlan` checks the approvers permissions as though that user was the one creating the `Operator`.

> This behavior will be enforced by a `ValidatingAdmissionWebhook`. In order to configure serving certs for the webhook

Author: > Do you have some docs on the use verb?

It's a made up _RBAC verb_, which would go in a `(Cluster)Role`; i.e not a webhook verb/action.

> Seems reasonable assuming the following: ...

You've pretty much outlined the idea -- there are a few slight differences that will hopefully be clear once we push the updates to this enhancement.

**Note:** *Both namespace and cluster scoped resources are gathered using this label selector. Namespace scoped components are selected across all namespaces.*

Once associated with an `Operator`, a component's reference will be listed in the `status.components.resource` field of that `Operator`. Component references will also be enriched with abnormal status conditions relevant to the operator. These conditions should follow [k8s status condition conventions](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#typical-status-properties) and in some cases may be copied directly from the component status.

```yaml
status:
  components:
    matchLabels:
        operators.coreos.com/v2/operators/my-operator: ""
    resources:
    - kind: ClusterServiceVersion
      namespace: my-ns
      name: plumbus.v2.0.0-alpha
      uid: d70a53b5-d06a-11e9-821f-9a2e3b9d8156
      apiVersion: operators.coreos.com/v1alpha1
      resourceVersion: 109811
      conditions:
      - type: Installing
        status: True
        reason: AllPreconditionsMet
        message: deployment rolling out
        lastTransitionTime: "2019-09-16T22:26:29Z"
```

> Not all components will need to have status conditions surfaced. Initially, it should be sufficient to add conditions for:

Author: Not every resource has status conditions and we'll most likely need to do a mapping when we implement this (since under the cover they are different golang types). Other than that, I was thinking that it didn't make sense to have conditions for resources like `ServiceAccounts` and RBAC, etc... That being said, we can always add more as we find we need them.

- `CustomResourceDefinitions` and `APIServices`
- `Deployments`, `Pods`, and `ReplicaSets`
- `ClusterServiceVersions`, `Subscriptions`, and `InstallPlans`

### Generated Component Selection

For `v1alpha1` and `v1` OLM resource types that result in the generation of new resources, OLM will project labels onto the generated resources when:

- they match the afforementioned label key convention
- an `Operator` resource exists for the label

This means that labels will be copied from:

> - `Subscriptions` onto resolved `Subscriptions` and `InstallPlans`

Author: This is correct as is. Currently `Subscriptions` resolve other `Subscriptions`.

The `Subscription` resource will be iterated to have a new optional field, `spec.serviceAccountRef`, which will be used by OLM in place of the `ServiceAccount` referenced by `OperatorGroups`.

```yaml
apiVersion: operators.coreos.com/v1alpha1
kind: Subscription
metadata:
  name: plumbus
  namespace: operators
spec:
  serviceAccountRef:
    name: mr-plumbus
    namespace: sa-namespace
```

When an existing `Subscription` is encountered, OLM will attempt to associate it with an `Operator` resource automatically. Tthe `Subscription` will be associated with an `Operator` resource if its `package`, `channel`, and `CatalogSource` matches the `Operator`'s `spec.updates` field:

- if an `Operator` is already associated with the `Subscription` but the `package`, `channel`, `CatalogSource`, or `ServiceAccount` no longer match, OLM will update the `Subscription`'s `package`, `channel`, `CatalogSource`, and `ServiceAccount` to be in line with the `Operator`.
- if no `Operator` resource is found , OLM will generate a new one with a matching `spec.updates` field of type `CatalogSource`. Additionally, OLM will search for an `OperatorGroup` in the same namespace and

>   - if one is found, the `Subscription` will inherit its `ServiceAccount`

Author: This is correct as is. We're talking about changes to `Subscription` `ServiceAccount` resolution.

>   - if one is found, the `Subscription` will inherit its `ServiceAccount`

Reviewer 2: Thanks, then I recommend this to make it a bit clearer:
```suggestion
  - if one is found, the `Subscription` will inherit the `OperatorGroup`'s `ServiceAccount`
```

>   - If zero or more than one is found, then the `Subscription` will inherit the default `ServiceAccount` of its namespace

Author: This is correct as is.

>   - If zero or more than one is found, then the `Subscription` will inherit the default `ServiceAccount` of its namespace

Reviewer 2: This is confusing.  As the CR stands today `Subscription` isn't associated with a `ServiceAccount`.  Therefore it needs to be captured in the `Operator`.  An `Operator` rolls up one `Subscription` in this scenario when generating the `Operator`.

```yaml
status:
  updates:
    type: BundleImage
    bundleImage: quay.io/my-namespace/my-operator@sha256:123abc...
```

The bundle image will be pulled, unpacked, and applied to the cluster without additional dependency resolution. Top-level status condition `SourceImportError`, with condition reason `BundleImagePullFailed` will be surfaced if any issue is encountered while pulling the bundle image.

```yaml
- type: SourceImportError
  status: True
  reason: BundleImagePullFailed
  message: the bundle image pull has failed
  lastTransitionTime: "2019-09-16T22:26:29Z"
```

Like with the `CatalogSource` variant, an `InstallPlan` will be used to both apply bundle contents and provide a content record for reference. The top-level status condition `DivergedFromSource` will also be used, but with a different condition reason; `ComponentsDivergeFromBundleImage`.

```yaml
conditions:
- type: DivergedFromSource
  status: True
  reason: ComponentsDivergeFromBundleImage
  message: on-cluster components diverge from bundle image
  lastTransitionTime: "2019-09-16T22:26:29Z"
```

### Risks and Mitigations

#### Operator Info Leak

> **Problem:** With operators now being represented by a cluster scoped resource, information about installed operators is available outside the scope of the namespace it's deployed into.

Author: The thought is that restriction of operator install can be done with RBAC on the `ServiceAccount` referenced by an `Operator`. An admin of appropriate permissions could create a `ServiceAccount`, create (Cluster)Roles/RoleBindings to grant permissions in desired installable namespaces to that `ServiceAccount`, and grant the `use` verb to the user or group they want to enable those permissions for. Does that track?

> **Problem:** With operators now being represented by a cluster scoped resource, information about installed operators is available outside the scope of the namespace it's deployed into.

Reviewer 2: That sounds reasonable.  If granted the ability to create an `Operator` it then simply comes down to the permissions allowed through the SA on that `Operator` which are limited by the `ValidatingAdmissionWebhook` noted earlier.  Thanks.

- Available by default

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

On upgrade, an existing cluster can continue to use OLM as it had before. OLM will infer and generate any new resources required.

Any downgrade procedure would need to take into account that using many different install `ServiceAccounts` in a single namesace is not possible in the previous version of OLM. This means that all `Subscriptions` in a namespace would need to share an `OperatorGroup` with a `ServiceAccount` to drive installation of their resources. This may require that some `Subscriptions` are moved to new namespaces since they could have different scoping requirements. Additionally, the fact that `OperatorGroups` don't support specifying the namespace of a `SerivceAccount` must be taken into account.

### Version Skew Strategy

The API being added is net-new, and only addative changes are being made to existing OLM resources. Handling skew for upgrades/downgrades is discussed in [that section](#upgrade-/-downgrade-strategy).

## Implementation History

N/A

## Drawbacks

- A new API resource is required
- Listing operators becomes a privileged operation that leaks info about existing namespaces and resources

> - Implict agreement that an operator is a cluster singleton

Reviewer 2: I think this has some drawbacks, see previous comment.

## Alternatives

> We can define a namespace-scoped operator resource in addition to the cluster-scoped one. We can use the cluster-scoped resource to indicate an operator may span multiple namespaces, and a namespace scoped operator to indicate it should be installed only in a specific namespace.

Reviewer 2: What are the use cases for operators that "span multiple namespaces"?  An operator can watch resources across the cluster with sufficient RBAC, so it's not about what it can touch.  And you could use multiple instances of `Operator` to install an operator more than once.

Author: > What are the use cases for operators that "span multiple namespaces"? An operator can watch resources across the cluster with sufficient RBAC, so it's not about what it can touch. 

We're trying to set the stage for a better operator author user story. An operator author knows best how their operator works, and it's come into question whether enforcing the use of a single namespace is a reasonable constraint. For example, some operators are written with hardcoded namespace, and others with `RoleBindings` in `kube-system`. Rather than "what it can touch", I'd say it's a "native configuration" story. Along with this we also need to add knobs for admins to map those native namespaces.

> And you could use multiple instances of Operator to install an operator more than once.

I don't think that multiple instances of an operator is a tenable configuration for a cluster. This comes down to the fact that conversion webhooks and extension api-servers are effectively singletons and require exactly one backing service to operate. While we can come up with creative (and probably complex) ways of intercepting and routing traffic, I think that any real solution will require better first-class multitenancy in kubernetes.

Reviewer 2: When I think of the operator installation I think mostly about the `Deployment` and associated `Roles` and `RoleBindings` (permissions in CSV currently).  Anything outside of this is managed by part of the operator's bundle or managed by the operator's controller directly.  I see bundled and controller managed resources as outside of the scope of what `Operator` will manage.  It is possible today to create a bundle with `Roles` and `RoleBindings` outside of the namespace in which the `Deployment` is created, but `Subscription` is namespaced.  What is changing about the operator story that changes the scope of operator installation to imply operators are a cluster scoped resource?  At the end of the day, the core of an operator is the controller deployed as a pod by a deployment, which is namespaced.

Reviewer: I don't think the operator story is changing; the implementation is evolving to better match the reality of the platform. As @njhale points out, having multiple instances of the same controller running concurrently is not a good fit for the way k8s is evolving its CRD story. As I understand it, the outcome is that you'll have one instance of a controller running in the cluster, but then you might be able to choose whether that controller watches one namespace, a list of namespaces, or all namespaces.
